# Transport Layer Protocols

## TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
### TCP Features
- Connection-oriented communication: Hosts can exchange data only when a connection is established.
- Reliable communication: The destination host sends acknowledgements for each TCP segment.
- Sequencing: Sequence numbers are providing for correct data ordering regardless of how it was recieved.
- Flow control: The destination host can tell the source host to change the rate of data being sent.

### TCP Headers
- Source and destination ports (16 bits each)
- Sequence number
- Acknowledgement number
- Flag bits: ACK, SYN, FIN
- Window size

### TCP Three-Way Handshake
- Used for establishing a network connection.
- Process
  1. SYN
  2. SYN, ACK
  3. ACK

### TCP Four-Way Handshake
- Used for terminating a network connection.
- Process
  1. FIN
  2. ACK
  3. FIN
  4. ACK

### TCP Sequencing and Acknowledgements
- Sequence numbers are set by the following method.
  - Initial sequence numbers are set randomly by the sending host.
  - Subsequent segments have the sequence numbers incremented from the previous segment.
- Acknowledgement numbers are set by using forward acknowledgements.
  - Forward acknowledgement is used to indicate the next segment the host expects to recieve.
  - If the acknowledgement hasn't been recieved, the segment gets retransmitted.

## UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
### UDP Features
- Connection-less communication
- Non-reliable communication
- No sequencing
- No flow control

### UDP Headers
- Source and destination ports
- Length
- Checksum
