# Chapter 9: Main Memory

## Background
- Memory is a large array of addressable bytes.
- A memory unit needs to handle a sequence of addresses (which data is contained in the address is not important to the memory unit).
- In order for memory to work properly, the following hardware requirements should be satisfied.
    - Speed: A cache between the CPU and main memory is required to ensure faster loading.
    - Safety: Invalid memory accesses should be stopped at the hardware level.
        - One option is to use the base and limit register method can be used to ensure safety.

### Address Binding and Address Spaces
- Address binding is the process of transforming an address of one context to another.
- When a program executes, where on the memory it's going to run is unknown, therefore address binding is neccesary.
- An address is binding in the following process.
    - Symbolic address (source code): Variables.
    - Relocatable address (object file): Made from symbolic addresses by the compiler.
    - Absolute address (program in memory)
- For address spaces, logical and physical address spaces exist.
    - Logical address space: Generated by the CPU. 
    - Physical address space: The actual location in main memory.
        - Transformed from the logical address by a hardware device called the MMU (memory management unit).
        - One option for the MMU implementation is to use a relocation register (add relocation value to every logical address).

### Dynamic Loading and Dynamic Linking
- Dynamic Loading: Split the program into multiple modules, and load each module only when it is accessed. 
- Dynamic Linking
    - A program can access routines in shared libraries or DLLs (dynamically linked libraries)
    - DLLs are loaded only once to main memory and can be shared by multiple processes.

## Contiguous Memory Allocation
- Contiguous memory allocation is one method of implementation for memory.
- The memory is split into the operating system memory and user memory.
- The user memory is used by multiple variable-sized memory blocks that are each used by a process.
- Memory Protection
    - Memory can be protected by using relocation and limit registers.
    - The hardware checks if the address is smaller than the limit, and adds the relocation register.
- Memory Allocation
    - Each process is allocated a variable-sized partition of the memory.
    - The operating system allocates memory to a process by the following methods.
        - First fit.
        - Best fit.
        - Worst fit.
    - This results in fragmentation.
        - External Fragementation: Holes left in the main memory due to allocation and deallocation.
            - Can be fixed by compaction (squashing free blocks together) or paging.
        - Internal Fragementation: There is unused memory within a given partition.

## Paging
- Paging is a memory management scheme that fixes external fragmentation (internal fragmentation still exists). 
- Method
    - The physical memory is split into fixed-size blocks called frames.
    - The logical memory is split into pages that have the same size as frames.
    - Each logical address is split into two parts: the page number (the first n bits) and the page offset (the rest of the bits).
    - Each process as a page table that stores frame numbers and is indexed by the page number.
    - A logical address is translated by switching the page number with the frame number found in the page table.
- Hardware Support
    - PTBR (Page Table Base Register): The page table is kept in main memory to reduce context switch time.
    - TLB (Translation Look-Aside Buffer): A hardware cache for pages, required since memory accesses are doubled when using paging.
        - The TLB is a key-value store where the key is the page number and the value is the frame number.
        - Replacement policies can be changed, and some entries can be wired down.
        - The TLB can be flushed for each context switch, or can have a ASID (address-space identifiers) stored instead.
- Memory Protection
    - A valid-invalid bit is stored within the page table for memory protection.
    - A PTLR (page table length register) may be used to check if a logical address is within the valid address range.
- Shared Pages: Frames can be shared between processes.
