+++
title = "tls"
+++

# TLS (Transport Layer Security)

## TLS Handshake

In order to open a secure communication channel between the server and the client, shared keys must
exist to encrypt the data. The TLS handshake protocol is used to share the keys.

### TLS 1.2

The following are the steps for the TLS 1.2 handshake protocol.

1. Client Hello (Client to Server)

   - The client sends a request to the application server.

   - The list of variables the client sends is as below.

     - Version: The highest TLS version the client supports.
     - Client Random Number
     - Session ID: The initial handshake will have an all-zero session ID.
     - Cipher Suites: The cipher suites the client supports.

2. Server Hello (Server to Client)

   - The application server responds to the Client Hello request with the same set of variables.

     - Version: The highest TLS version the server supports.
     - Server Random Number
     - Session ID: A session ID generated by the server.
     - Cipher Suites: The cipher suite chosen by the server.

3. Certificate (Server to Client)

   - The application server sends their certificate and the full certificate chain.

4. Server Hello Done (Server to Client)

5. Client Key Exchange (Client to Server)

   - The client creates and sends an encrypted pre-master key if the certificate is valid.
   - The pre-master key is a secret key encrypted using the server's public key.
   - The master key is derived from the pre-master key and client/server randoms.
   - The session key is derived from the master key and client/server randoms.

6. Change Cipher Spec (Client to Server)

   - The client tells the server to change cipher specs for subsequent communications.
   - This message is not part of the TLS handshake protocol, and is a separate protocol.

7. Finished (Client to Server)

   - The client generates an encrypted verification data by hashing all the handshake messages prior and encrypting that with the client's session keys.

8. Change Cipher Spec (Server to Client)

   - The server tells the client that it is ready for encrypted communication.

9. Finished (Server to Client)

   - The client generates an encrypted verification data by hashing all the handshake messages prior and encrypting that with the client's session keys.

### TLS 1.3

TLS 1.3 reduces the RTT count by 1 compared to TLS 1.2, opens up pathways for
ESNI (Encrypted Server Name Indication) and ECH (Encrypted Client Hello), and can support mutual
authentication with an encrypted client certificate.

### Session Resumption

Instead of doing the full TLS handshake for every connection, the session information can be used
to reuse the pre-computed keys within an abbreviated TLS handshake.
