# Chapter 2: Data Models and Query Languages

## Relational Models vs Document Models

### Why use document models instead of relational models

- Better scalability and performance for certain cases.
    - Queries are provided with high locality when accessing data within a single document.
- Data schema is unrestricted, therefore allowing a more dynamic and expressive data model.
    - Document models are schema-on-read, where the structure of the data is implicit and only interpreted when the data is read. Relational models are schema-on-write.
- Object-relational mismatch may exist in relational data models.
    - Data access patterns in applications are different from the queries’ access pattern in relational models where multiple relations may have to be visited.
- Certain specialized query operations are not supported by the relational model.

### Why use relational models instead of document models

- Document models are better for storing a large collection of small objects.
    - For document models, updates that change the encoded size of a document leads to a complete rewrite to disk.
    - The read performance increase due to locality only comes when large parts of the document are accessed at the same time.
- Document models are awkward when representing many-to-one or many-to-many relations.
    - Applying normalization (removing duplication by storing a reference to the data) for document model databases is awkward since document models have weak support for joins.
    - To mitigate this, denormalization or manual joins can be used. Denormalization leads to data duplication and extra work for consistency. Manual joins are most likely slower than generated queries by the query optimizer in relational models.

### Query Languages

- Query languages may be imperative or declarative.
    - Imperative queries define the steps needed to reach a certain goal.
    - Declarative queries define the result of the execution and does not care about the steps needed.
        - SQL is declarative, the execution plan for queries are generated by the query optimizer.
        - Declarative queries are easier to work with, and can allow parallel execution since the algorithm can change dynamically.