# 3. Database Storage: Files & Pages

## Background
- Storage Hierarchy
    - Faster but smaller byte-addressable volatile memory
    - Slower but larger block-addressable non-volatile memory 
- Access Methods
    - Random access on non-volatile storage is slower than sequential access.
    - DBMS algorithms should try to maximize sequential accesses.
- Database System Design Goals
    - The DBMS should be able to manage databases larger than the amount of available memory.
    - Non-volatile storage I/O is expensive and should be managed carefully.
    - The DBMS should maximize the number of sequential accesses.

## File Storage
- File
    - The DBMS stores the database as one or more files.
    - The format of the database file is typically in a proprietary format.
    - Each file can store multiple pages.
    - The OS sees the database files as normal files, and most DBMSs use the OS's file system.
- Storage Manager (Storage Engine, Disk Manager)
    - The storage manager is responsible for maintaining database files.
    - The storage manager organizes the files as a collection of pages.
    - The storage manager is typically not responsible for data replication.
- Page
    - A page is a fixed-size block of data that can contain tuples, meta-data, indexes, log records.
    - Each page is given a unique identifier (page ID).
    - The DBMS uses an indirection layer to map page IDs to physical locations.
    - A database page differs from:
        - Hardware pages: Largest size of atomic writes.
        - OS pages: Pages used in memory.
    - Larger pages sizes help reads (can read more data) but does not help writes (writes are done per-page).
    - DBMSs manage pages in files on disk in different ways.
        - Heap file organization.
        - Tree file organization.
        - Sequential/sorted file organization.
        - Hashing file organization.
- Heap File Organization
    - A heap file is an unordered collection of pages with tuples that are stored in random order.
    - Meta-data is used to track location of files and free space.
    - The interfaces (Create, Get, Write, Delete) Page are the only things exposed.

## Page Layout
- Page Layout Approaches
    - Tuple-oriented Storage: Most common layout scheme is slotted pages.
    - Log-structured Storage
    - Index-organized Storage
