# 3~4. Database Storage

## Storage 
- Storage Hierarchy
    - Faster but smaller byte-addressable volatile memory
    - Slower but larger block-addressable non-volatile memory 
- Access Methods
    - Random access on non-volatile storage is slower than sequential access.
    - DBMS algorithms should try to maximize sequential accesses.

## Disk-Oriented DBMS
- Overview
    - The entire database is on disk, where the data in the database are managed by one or more files.
    - Each database file is organized into pages. The first page is the directory page.
    - To operate on the data, the data needs to be put into memory. This is done by having a buffer pool.
- Database System Design Goals
    - The DBMS should be able to manage databases larger than the amount of available memory.
    - Non-volatile storage I/O is expensive and should be managed carefully.
    - The DBMS should maximize the number of sequential accesses.

## File Storage
- File
    - The DBMS's storage manager manages the databases's files.
    - The OS sees the database files as normal files, and most DBMSs use the OS's file system.
    - The format of the database file is typically in a proprietary format.
- Storage Manager (Storage Engine, Disk Manager)
    - The storage manager organizes the files as a collection of pages.
    - The storage manager is typically not responsible for data replication.

## Database Pages
- Page
    - A page is a fixed-size block of data that can contain tuples, meta-data, indexes, log records.
    - Some systems will require that pages are self-contained (all the info is within each page).
    - Each page is given a unique identifier (page ID).
    - Most DBMSs use an indirection layer to map page IDs to the file path and offset of the page.
    - A database page differs from:
        - Hardware pages: Largest size of atomic writes.
        - OS pages: Pages used in memory.
    - Larger pages sizes help reads (can read more data) but does not help writes (writes are done per-page).
    - DBMSs manage pages in files on disk in different ways.
        - Heap file organization.
        - Tree file organization.
        - Sequential/sorted file organization.
        - Hashing file organization.

## Database Heap

- Heap File Organization
    - A heap file is an unordered collection of pages with tuples that are stored in random order.
    - Meta-data is used to track location of files and free space.
    - The interfaces (Create, Get, Write, Delete) Page are the only things exposed.

## Page Layout
- Each page includes a header for meta-data on the page's contents.
    - Page size.
    - Checksum.
    - DBMS version.
    - Transaction visibility.
    - Self-containment.

- Page Layout Approaches
    - Tuple-oriented Storage: Most common layout scheme is slotted pages.
    - Log-structured Storage
    - Index-organized Storage

## Tuple-oriented Storage
- Slotted Pages
    - Each page contains a header, slot array, and slots.
        - Header
            - Number of used slots is kept track of.
            - Free space pointer is stored. This points to the offset of the starting position of the last slot used.
        - Slot Array
            - Stores the offset of each slot and the length of each slot.
            - Increases from the header and the slots decrease from the end (like a stack and heap).
        - Slots
            - Tuples are stored in slots where one tuple is in one slot.
    - Record IDs
        - Each tuple is assigned a unique record ID by the DBMS.
        - This is the (file ID, page ID, slot number) and represents the physical location of the tuple.
        - An indirection layer may exist to efficiently get the physical location of a tuple.
    - Problems
        - Fragmentation
            - Pages are not fully utilized due to unusable space and empty spaces. 
        - Useless Disk I/O
            - DBMS must fetch entire pages to update one tuple.
        - Random Disk I/O
            - If every tuple to update is on a separate page, all pages need to be read from disk. 

## Log-Structured Storage
- Log-Structured Merge Trees
    - The DBMS maintains a log that records changes to tuples instead of storing tuples in pages.
    - Each log entry is either a Put or Delete operation on a tuple.
    - Data Structures
        - MemTable
            - An in-memory data structure that stores logs.
            - Data structure could be a linked list, B+ tree, trie, or any data structure.
                - Usually some type of tree data structure to support fast-lookups.
            - Updates to the same key can be done in-place since its in memory.
                - Because of this, when updates happen, the key should first be checked if its in the MemTable.
            - If the MemTable is full, it is flushed out to the SSTable on disk in the background.
                - The flushed out MemTable is made by walking through the MemTable and sorting it by the key.
            - Only one instance of the MemTable exists on memory.
        - SSTable (Sorted String Table)
            - A linear disk data structure that stores sorted key-value pairs.
            - Multiple SSTables may exist on disk.
                - The SSTables themselves are sorted by newest to oldest. 
                - Compaction by merge-sort removes redundant information and speeds up reads.
            - The notion of levels may be used to handle SSTables.
                - Two SSTables from a previous level may be merge-sorted into a new SSTable on a higher level.
        - SummaryTable
            - Additional metadata handled by the DBMS.
            - Using log-structured merge trees will lead to fast writes but slow reads.
                - In the worst case, the DBMS needs to search through the MemTable and all the SSTables.
                - SummaryTables can help read speeds because it can help to skip SSTables that aren't important.
            - A SummaryTable stores the min/max key per SSTable and a key filter per level.
                - The min/max key helps with range queries where independent calls to filters are inefficient.
                - The key filter is implemented by a Bloom filter that only tells whether or not the key exists.
    - Problems
        - Write-Amplification
            - One write to a tuple results in multiple writes in the MemTable and SSTables.
        - Expensive Compaction

## Index-Organized Storage
- DBMS uses a data structure that controls sorted pages. 
    - Any data structure such as a B+ tree can work.
    - The pages are sorted by the key, and each page follows the layout of a slotted page.

## Tuple Storage
- A tuple is a sequence of bytes with a header containing metadata.
- How the tuple's bytes are organized is a decision made by the DBMS.
- All attributes in a tuple has to be word-aligned to be faster when accessed by the CPU.
    - Use empty bit padding for word-alignment.
    - Reorder attributes to make sure that they are aligned.
