+++
title = "parallel-computing"
+++

# Parallel Computing

## Instruction-level Parallelism (ILP)

A computer program is a sequence of instructions, and a computer processor
executes these instructions one at a time by fetching/decoding the next
instruction, performing some operation, and then changing the execution context
state.

Instruction-level parallelism (ILP) is a hardware-level technique for executing
multiple instructions at the same time in a single processor to improve
performance. Instruction-level parallelism has its limits since instructions
have data dependencies between them, preventing them from being executed in
parallel.

### Superscalar Execution

Superscalar execution is where the processor automatically finds instructions
that are independent from each other and executes them in parallel on multiple
execution units. A superscalar processor has one execution context (the
registers) but multiple execution units (fetch/decode units and ALU units).

### Out-of-order Execution

Out-of-order execution is a technique where instructions are reordered such that
maximum efficiency can be achieved. Algorithms like Tomasulo's algorithm are
used for scheduling instructions to be executed out of order.

## Multi-core Processing

Instruction-level parallelism on single core processors have its limits, since
the parallel computing opportunities may not be found in the level of
granularity of individual instructions. Multi-core processing solves this issue
by having multiple duplicated processing cores. Each individual core may have
less functionality than a superscalar processor, so each core may be slower than
a single-core machine but they can be used together to achieve higher
performance.

Since every core is duplicated, unlike superscalar processors, each core has its
own execution context.

It is the job of the software to find parallelism at a higher level and dispatch
the tasks to different cores in multi-core processing. This can be done in
multiple ways, including manually spawning threads or using parallel constructs
that automatically distribute tasks to multiple cores.

## SIMD Processing

SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) processing is a technique where multiple
execution units are placed within a single core, and the same instruction is
executed on multiple data in parallel.

SIMD processing can perform in the worst case if there are divergent branches of
execution due to conditional statements. Coherent execution is necessary for
efficient SIMD processing, where coherent execution refers to having multiple
execution units execute the same instruction at the same time. Coherent
execution is not necessary for parallelization in general, since each core in
multi-core processing can fetch different instructions independently. Divergent
execution is the opposite of coherent execution, and can be a major issue for
performance in SIMD processing.

Intel AVX instructions or ARM Neon instructions are instruction sets for SIMD
processing. The instructions are generated by the compiler and can be written
explicitly by the programmer using intrinsic functions.

Explicit SIMD is where the SIMD instructions are generated at compile time,
while implicit SIMD is where the hardware executes the same scalar instruction
from multiple program instances on multiple SIMD execution units.

Processors can have heterogeneous execution units, where some execution units
are for SIMD processing and some are for scalar processing. In this case, the
processor can run scalar instructions and vectorized instructions at the same
time in a superscalar fashion.

## Hardware-level Multi-threading

Although parallel processing can speed up execution, memory latency can become
the bottleneck for performance. Adding multiple execution units like multi-core
processing or SIMD processing simplifies the core, making techniques like memory
prefetching less effective. Multi-threading is a technique where each core has
multiple execution contexts and is responsible for multiple threads of
execution, therefore when a thread stalls due to memory latency, the core can
switch to another thread that is ready to execute. Here, each thread may take
longer to execute, but the overall throughput of the core increases since the
core's utilization gets higher.

More hardware-level threads on a core does not directly translate to better
performance, since adding more threads wouldn't help if the CPU utilization is
already fully utilized.

## Memory

If the program is CPU-intensive, then the performance bottleneck in memory is
more in memory bandwidth rather than memory latency. This means that processors
request data at a much higher rate than the memory can provide. This problem
cannot be solved by techniques like caching or memory prefetching since it is
the problem of supplying memory to the processor.

For solving memory bandwidth problems, computations should be programmed so that
memory is accessed less often with techiniques like reusing data or sharing data
across threads.

## Parallel Programming

### Programming Primitives

#### Locks

A lock is a synchronization primitive that allows only one thread to access a
shared resource at a time.

#### Barriers

A barrier is a synchronization primitive that makes multiple threads of
execution wait until all threads have reached a certain point in the program.
