# 1. Introduction

## Distributed Systems
### Definition
- Group of cooperating computers communicating over a network to provide a service.

### Why do we need distributed systems
- Performance increase through parallelism.
- Fault tolerance through replication. 
- Physical reasons (systems that are inherently distributed).
- Security increase through isolation.

### Challenges in building distributed systems
- Concurrency among multiple computers.
- Complex interactions and timing issues.
- Partial failures.
- Achieving an actual performance increase.

### Goals in building distributed systems
- Abstraction
    - Goal
        - Provide an interface for applications that hides the fact that the system is a distributed system.
- Performance
    - Goal
        - Scalability: Achieve increased performance as the number of servers increase.
    - Challenges
        - Load balancing tasks between servers.
        - Storage devices need to be scaled to match the scaled number of servers.
- Fault Tolerance
    - Faults that rarely happen on one device can happen often as the number of devices increase.
    - Goal
        - Availability: Service continues to be available even with partial failures.
        - Recoverability: Service can operate as if nothing had happened after a failure has been repaired.
    - Solution
        - Use non-volatile storage to write checkpoints and logs.
        - Data replication.
    - Challenges
        - Achieve fault tolerance with minimal interactions with non-volatile storage devices.
- Consistency
    - Goal
        - Strong Consistency: Provide a consistent and well-behaved infrastructure for data.
        - Weak Consistency: Have no guarantees about data consistency.
    - Challenges
        - Strong consistency sacrifices performance and is an expensive specification to implement.
        - Weak consistent systems are painful to use for users.

## Case Study: MapReduce
### Overview
- Problem: Google needed to perform tasks that take huge amounts of computation on huge amounts of data.
- Goal
    - Abstract away the fact that the system is distributed.
    - The programmer only defines the Map and Reduce functions.

### Algorithm
- Input is split into multiple files or chunks.
- A predefined Map function runs on each input chuck, producing a list of key-value pairs.
    - Each Map call is called a task, and can be distributed among multiple computers.
    - This output list is called an intermediate output.
- When Maps are done, all intermediate values for each keys are gathered (a list of values for each key).
- These lists of values are passed to a predefined Reduce function.
- The final output is a set of key-value pairs.

